ENH: Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) Enhancements (#17408)
scipy/scipy: doc/source/tutorial/signal.rst

    \newcommand{\IN}{{\mathbb{N}}}  % set of natural numbers
    \newcommand{\IR}{{\mathbb{R}}}  % set of real numbers
    \newcommand{\IZ}{{\mathbb{Z}}}  % set of integers
    \newcommand{\jj}{{\mathbb{j}}}  % imaginary unit
    \newcommand{\e}{\operatorname{e}}  % Euler's number
    \newcommand{\dd}{\operatorname{d}} % infinitesimal operator
    \newcommand{\conj}[1]{\overline{#1}} % complex conjugate
    \newcommand{\conjT}[1]{\overline{#1^T}} % transposed complex conjugate
    \newcommand{\inv}[1]{\left(#1\right)^{\!-1}} % inverse
    % Since the physics package is not loaded, we define the macros ourselves:
    \newcommand{\vb}[1]{\mathbf{#1}} % vectors and matrices are bold

.. shorthands to make the source more legible:
.. |ShortTimeFFT| replace:: :class:`ShortTimeFFT <scipy.signal.ShortTimeFFT>`
.. |old_stft| replace:: `stft <scipy.signal.stft>`
.. |old_istft| replace:: `istft <scipy.signal.istft>`
.. |old_spectrogram| replace:: `spectrogram <scipy.signal.spectrogram>`

.. _tutorial_stft:

Short-Time Fourier Transform
----------------------------
This section gives some background information on using the |ShortTimeFFT|

> class: For a complex valued signal :math:`x: \IR \mapsto\IC` the Short-time

Reviewer: Doesn't `\IR \mapsto\IC` mean it maps real signals to complex spectra?  But `ShortTimeFFT.stft(x...` says `The input signal as real or complex valued array`?

> class: For a complex valued signal :math:`x: \IR \mapsto\IC` the Short-time

Reviewer: This jumps immediately into rigorous math, could it just introduce the STFT in a basic way first to help people follow along?  Paraphrase "The STFT chops up the signal into overlapping chunks, tapers the ends of each, and applies FFT to each"

Fourier transform (STFT) is defined [4]_ as

.. math::

    S(f, t) := \int_\IR x(\xi)\, \conj{w(\xi-t)}\,\e^{-\jj2\pi f \xi}\dd\xi

for a given window function :math:`w: \IR \mapsto\IC` with its complex
conjugate being :math:`\conj{w(t)}`. It can be interpreted as determining the
scalar product of :math:`x` with the window :math:`w` which is translated by
the time :math:`t` and then modulated (i.e., frequency-shifted) by the
frequency :math:`f`.
For working with sampled signals :math:`x[k] := x(kT)`, :math:`k\in\IZ` with
sampling interval :math:`T` (being the inverse of the sampling frequency `fs`),
the discrete version, i.e., only evaluating the STFT at discrete grid points

> :math:`S[q, p] := S(q \Delta f, p\Delta t)`, :math:`q,p\in\IZ`, needs to be

Reviewer: Can you define what `p` and `q` are around here?

used. It can be formulated as

.. math::
    :label: eq_dSTFT

    S[q,p] = \sum_{k=0}^{N-1} x[k]\,\conj{w[k-p h]}\, \e^{-\jj2\pi q k / N}\ ,
              \quad q,p\in\IZ\ ,

with the time interval :math:`\Delta t := h T`, :math:`h\in\IN` (see `delta_t`)
being expressed as the `hop` size of :math:`h` samples and the frequency
interval :math:`\Delta f := 1 / (N T)` (see `delta_f`), which makes it FFT
compatible. :math:`w[m] := w(mT)` , :math:`m\in\IZ` is the sampled window
function.

To be more aligned to the implementation of |ShortTimeFFT|, it makes sense to
reformulate Eq. :math:numref:`eq_dSTFT` as a two-step process:

#. Extract the :math:`p`-th slice by windowing with the window :math:`w[m]`
   made up of :math:`M` samples (see `m_num`) centered

>    at :math:`t[p] :=  p \Delta t = h T` (see `delta_t`).
>    I. e.,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   at :math:`t[p] :=  p \Delta t = h T` (see `delta_t`),
   i.e.,
```

        :label: eq_STFT_windowing

        x_p[m] = x\!\big[m - \lfloor M/2\rfloor + h p\big]\, \conj{w[m]}\ ,
                 \quad m = 0, \ldots M-1\ ,

   where the integer :math:`\lfloor M/2\rfloor` represents ``M//2``, i.e, it is
   the mid point of the window (`m_num_mid`). For notational convenience,
   :math:`x[k]:=0` for :math:`k\not\in\{0, 1, \ldots, N-1\}` is assumed. In the
   subsection :ref:`tutorial_stft_sliding_win` the indexing of the slices is
   discussed in more detail.
#. Then perform a discrete Fourier transform (i.e., an
   :ref:`FFT <tutorial_FFT>`) of :math:`x_p[m]`.

   .. math::
        :label: eq_STFT_DFT

        S[q, p] = \sum_{m=0}^{M-1} x_p[m] \exp\!\big\{%
                                         -2\jj\pi (q + \phi_m)\, m / M\big\}\ .

   Note that a linear phase :math:`\phi_m` (see `phase_shift`) can be
   specified, which corresponds to shifting the input by :math:`\phi_m`
   samples. The default is :math:`\phi_m = \lfloor M/2\rfloor` (corresponds per
   definition to ``phase_shift = 0``), which suppresses linear phase components
   for unshifted signals.
   Furthermore, the FFT may be oversampled by padding :math:`w[m]` with zeros.

>    This can be achieved by specifying `mfft` to be larger that than the window

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This can be achieved by specifying `mfft` to be larger than the window
```

   length `m_num`---this sets :math:`M` to `mfft` (implying that also
   :math:`w[m]:=0` for :math:`m\not\in\{0, 1, \ldots, M-1\}` holds).

The inverse short-time Fourier transform (`istft`) is implemented by reversing
these two steps:

#. Perform the inverse discrete Fourier transform, i.e.,

   .. math::

      x_p[m] = \frac{1}{M}\sum_{q=0}^M S[q, p]\, \exp\!\big\{
                                          2\jj\pi (q + \phi_m)\, m / M\big\}\ .

#. Sum the shifted slices weighted by :math:`w_d[m]` to reconstruct the
   original signal, i.e.,

   .. math::

        x[k] = \sum_p x_p\!\big[\mu_p(k)\big]\, w_d\!\big[\mu_p(k)\big]\ ,\quad
               \mu_p(k) = k + \lfloor M/2\rfloor - h p

   for :math:`k \in [0, \ldots, n-1]`. :math:`w_d[m]` is the so-called
   canonical dual window of :math:`w[m]` and is also made up of :math:`M`
   samples.

> Note that not for all windows and hops an inverse STFT exists. For a given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that an inverse STFT does not necessarily exist for all windows and hop sizes. For a given
```

:math:numref:`eq_STFT_DiagM3`, :math:`\vb{U}_p=\vb{W}_{\!p}\vb{D}^{-1}` can be
expressed as

.. math::
    :label: eq_STFT_DualWinM

    U_p[m, k] &= W[m,k]\, D^{-1}[k,k]
               = \left(w[m] \delta_{m+ph,k}\right)
                 \inv{\sum_{\eta=0}^{P-1}  \vb{D}_\eta[k,k]} \delta_{m+ph,k}\\
               &= w[m] \inv{\sum_{\eta=0}^{P-1}\sum_{\mu=0}^{M-1}
                                 \big|w[\mu]\big|^2\,\delta_{m+ph, \mu+\eta h}}
                       \delta_{m+ph,k}\\
                &= w[m] \inv{\sum_{\eta=0}^{P-1} \big|w[m+(p-\eta)h]\big|^2}
                       \delta_{m+ph,k} \ .

This shows :math:`\vb{U}_p` has the identical structure as :math:`\vb{W}_p`
in Eq. :math:numref:`eq_STFT_WinMatrix1`, i.e., having only non-zero
entries on the :math:`(ph)`-th minor diagonal. The sum term in the inverse can
be interpreted as sliding :math:`|w[\mu]|^2` over :math:`w[m]` (with an
incorporated inversion), so only components overlapping with :math:`w[m]` have
an effect. Hence, all :math:`U_p[m, k]` far enough from the border are
identical windows. To circumvent border effects, :math:`x[k]` is padded with

> zeros, enlarging :math:`\vb{U}` so all slices which touch :math:`x[k]` contain
> identical the dual window

Reviewer: ```suggestion
zeros, enlarging :math:`\vb{U}` so all slices which touch :math:`x[k]` contain
the identical dual window
```

Is this what was meant?

.. math::

    w_d[m] = w[m] \inv{\sum_{\eta\in\IZ} \big|w[m + \eta\, h]\big|^2}\ .

Since :math:`w[m] = 0` holds for :math:`m \not\in\{0, \ldots, M-1\}`, it is
only required to sum over the indexes :math:`\eta` fulfilling
:math:`|\eta| < M/h`. The name dual window can be justified by inserting Eq.
:math:numref:`eq_STFT_Slice_p` into Eq. :math:numref:`eq_STFT_istftM`, i.e.,

.. math::

    \vb{x} = \sum_{p=0}^{P-1} \conjT{\vb{U}_p}\,\conjT{\vb{F}}\,
                                                 \vb{F}\,\vb{W}_{\!p}\,\vb{x}
        = \left(\sum_{p=0}^{P-1} \conjT{\vb{U}_p}\,\vb{W}_{\!p}\right)\vb{x}\ ,

showing that :math:`\vb{U}_p` and :math:`\vb{W}_{\!p}` are interchangeable.
Hence, :math:`w_d[m]` is also a valid window with dual window :math:`w[m]`.

> Note that :math:`w_d[m]` is not a unique dual window, due :math:`\vb{s}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that :math:`w_d[m]` is not a unique dual window, due to :math:`\vb{s}`
```

typically having more entries than :math:`\vb{x}`. It can be shown, that
:math:`w_d[m]` has the minimal energy (or :math:`L_2` norm) [4_], which is the
reason for being named the  "canonical dual window".

.. _tutorial_stft_legacy_stft:

Comparison with Legacy Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The functions |old_stft|, |old_istft|, and the |old_spectrogram| predate the
|ShortTimeFFT| implementation. This section discusses the key differences
between the older "legacy" and the newer |ShortTimeFFT| implementations. The
main motivation for a rewrite was the insight that integrating :ref:`dual
windows <tutorial_stft_dual_win>` could not be done in a sane way without

> breaking compatability. This opened the opportunity for rethinking the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
breaking compatibility. This opened the opportunity for rethinking the code
```

    >>> fs, N = 200, 1001  # 200 Hz sampling rate for 5 s signal
    >>> t_z = np.arange(N) / fs  # time indexes for signal
    >>> z = np.exp(2j*np.pi*70 * (t_z - 0.2*t_z**2))  # complex-valued chirp
    ...
    >>> nperseg, noverlap = 50, 40
    >>> win = ('gaussian', 1e-2 * fs)  # Gaussian with 0.01 s standard dev.
    ...
    >>> # Legacy STFT:
    >>> f0_u, t0, Sz0_u = stft(z, fs, win, nperseg, noverlap,
    ...                        return_onesided=False, scaling='spectrum')
    >>> f0, Sz0 = fftshift(f0_u), fftshift(Sz0_u, axes=0)
    ...
    >>> # New STFT:
    >>> SFT = ShortTimeFFT.from_window(win, fs, nperseg, noverlap,
    ...                                fft_mode='centered',
    ...                                scale_to='magnitude', phase_shift=None)
    >>> Sz1 = SFT.stft(z)
    ...
    >>> # Plot results:
    >>> fig1, axx = plt.subplots(2, 1, sharex='all', sharey='all',
    ...                          figsize=(6., 5.))  # enlarge figure a bit
    >>> t_lo, t_hi, f_lo, f_hi = SFT.extent(N, center_bins=True)
    >>> t_str0 = r"Legacy stft() produces $%d\times%d$ points" % Sz0.T.shape
    >>> t_str1 = r"ShortTimeFFT produces $%d\times%d$ points" % Sz1.T.shape

>     >>> _ = axx[0].set(title=t_str0, xlim=(t_lo, t_hi), ylim=(f_lo, f_hi))
>     >>> _ = axx[1].set(title=t_str1, xlabel="Time $t$ in seconds " +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    >>> axx[0].set(title=t_str0, xlim=(t_lo, t_hi), ylim=(f_lo, f_hi))
    >>> axx[1].set(title=t_str1, xlabel="Time $t$ in seconds " +
```

Is there a reason to assign to the throwaway `_`?  Suppressing doctest output or something?

    ...
    >>> # Calculate extent of plot with centered bins since imshow
    ... # does not interpolate by default:
    ... dt2 = (nperseg-noverlap) / fs  / 2 # equals SFT.delta_t / 2
    >>> df2 = fs / nperseg / 2 # equals SFT.delta_f / 2
    >>> extent0 = (-dt2, t0[-1] + dt2, f0[0] - df2, f0[-1] - df2)
    >>> extent1 = SFT.extent(N, center_bins=True)
    ...
    >>> kw = dict(origin='lower', aspect='auto', cmap='viridis')
    >>> im1a = axx[0].imshow(abs(Sz0), extent=extent0, **kw)
    >>> im1b = axx[1].imshow(abs(Sz1), extent=extent1, **kw)
    >>> fig1.colorbar(im1b, ax=axx, label="Magnitude $|S_z(t, f)|$")
    >>> _ = fig1.supylabel(rf"Frequency $f$ in Hertz ($\Delta f = %g\,$Hz)" %
    ...                    SFT.delta_f)
    >>> plt.show()

That the |ShortTimeFFT| produces 3 more time slices than the legacy version is
the main difference. As laid out in the :ref:`tutorial_stft_sliding_win`
section, all slices which touch the signal are incorporated in the new version.
This has the advantage that the STFT can be sliced and reassembled as shown in
the |ShortTimeFFT| code example. Furthermore, using all touching slices makes

> the ISTFT more robust in the case the windows are not non-zero everywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the ISTFT more robust in the case of windows that are zero somewhere.
```

The double negative is a little confusing

Note that the slices with identical time stamps produce equal results

> (up to numerical accuracy), i. e.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(up to numerical accuracy), i.e.:
```

    >>> np.allclose(Sz0, Sz1[:, 2:-1])
    True

> Generally, those the additional slices contain non-zero values. Due to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, those additional slices contain non-zero values. Due to the
```

large overlap in our example, they are quite small. E.g.:

    >>> abs(Sz1[:, 1]).min(), abs(Sz1[:, 1]).max()
    (6.925060911593139e-07, 8.00271269218721e-07)

The ISTFT can be utilized to reconstruct the original signal:

    >>> t0_r, z0_r = istft(Sz0_u, fs, win, nperseg, noverlap,
    ...                    input_onesided=False, scaling='spectrum')
    >>> z1_r = SFT.istft(Sz1, k1=N)
    ...
    >>> len(z0_r), len(z)
    (1010, 1001)
    >>> np.allclose(z0_r[:N], z)
    True
    >>> np.allclose(z1_r, z)
    True

Note that the legacy implementation returns a signal, which is longer than the
original. On the other hand, the new `istft` allows the length signal length or

> the slice to be specified. The deviation in length in the old implementation is
> caused by the fact the signal length is not a multiple of the slices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the slice to be specified. The length discrepancy in the old implementation is
caused by the fact that the signal length is not a multiple of the slices.
```

"the new `istft` allows the signal length or the slice to be specified" meaning the k0, k1 parameter?

Further differences between the new and legacy versions in this example are:

* The parameter ``fft_mode='centered'`` ensures that the zero frequency is
  vertically centered for two-sided FFTs in the plot. With the legacy
  implementation, `fftshift <scipy.fft.fftshift>` needs to be utilized.

>   ``fftyp='twosided'`` produces the same behavior as the old version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``fft_mode='twosided'`` produces the same behavior as the old version.
```

Is this an old name that wasn't updated?

    True

On the other hand, the legacy |old_spectrogram| provides another STFT
implementation with the key difference being the different handling of the
signal borders. The following example shows how to use the |ShortTimeFFT| to
obtain an identical SFT as produced with the legacy |old_spectrogram|:

    >>> # Legacy spectrogram (detrending for complex signals not useful):
    >>> f2_u, t2, Sz2_u = spectrogram(z, fs, win, nperseg, noverlap,
    ...                               detrend=None, return_onesided=False,
    ...                               scaling='spectrum', mode='complex')
    >>> f2, Sz2 = fftshift(f2_u), fftshift(Sz2_u, axes=0)
    ...
    >>> # New STFT:
    ... SFT = ShortTimeFFT.from_window(win, fs, nperseg, noverlap,
    ...                                fft_mode='centered',
    ...                                scale_to='magnitude', phase_shift=None)
    >>> Sz3 = SFT.stft(z, p0=0, p1=(N-noverlap)//SFT.hop, k_offset=nperseg//2)
    >>> t3 = SFT.t(N, p0=0, p1=(N-noverlap)//SFT.hop, k_offset=nperseg//2)
    ...
    >>> np.allclose(t2, t3)
    True
    >>> np.allclose(f2, SFT.f)
    True
    >>> np.allclose(Sz2, Sz3)
    True

> The difference to the other STFTs is that the time slices do not start at 0 but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference from the other STFTs is that the time slices do not start at 0 but
```

at ``nperseg//2``, i.e.:

    >>> t2
    array([0.125, 0.175, 0.225, 0.275, 0.325, 0.375, 0.425, 0.475, 0.525,
           ...
           4.625, 4.675, 4.725, 4.775, 4.825, 4.875])

Furthermore, only slices which do not stick out to the right are returned,

> making the last slice be centered at 4.875 s, being shorter as with the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
centering the last slice at 4.875 s, which makes it shorter than with the default
```
